HARI SREENIVASAN: Good evening.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Judy Woodruff is away.
On tonight's "PBS NewsHour":
Puerto Rico in bankruptcy.
We talk to the territory's
governor about the island's
troubles and what can be done
to save its economy.
Also ahead this Friday: It's
the final push for votes in
France's presidential election,
a look at the race that's
upended French politics.
How an innovative program in
San Diego is cutting costs of
diabetes management by looking
at the big picture of health.
DR.
ATHENA PHILIS-TSIMIKAS,
Scripps Whittier Diabetes
Institute: It's not that
easy to expect someone
to remember to test their
blood sugar, take their pill,
to go out and take that walk,
to have exactly the right
meal on the table all the
time to take care of this.
HARI SREENIVASAN:
And it's Friday.
Mark Shields and Michael Gerson
are here to talk about what's
next for the Republicans'
health care bill and the
political stories this week.
All that and more on
tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: The
U.S. economy is showing
signs of rebounding,
after a lackluster first
quarter.
The Labor Department
reports that employers
added a net of 211,000
jobs in April, up sharply
from the month of March.
The unemployment rate for
April fell to 4.4 percent,
a nearly 10-year low.
The strong showing could
increase odds that the
Federal Reserve will
raise interest rates
again next month.
In Somalia, a U.S. Navy
SEAL has been killed in
a raid on the Islamist
militant group Al-Shabaab.
It's the first American combat
death there since 1993, when
two helicopters were shot
down in Mogadishu.
U.S. officials say the SEAL
died on a mission supporting
Somali forces yesterday.
Two other Americans
were also wounded.
Thousands of Afghans turned
out today to hail the return
of a former warlord to Kabul.
Gulbuddin Hekmatyar
responded with a demand
that U.S. and other outside
forces leave Afghanistan.
He rallied the crowd with a
call for peace with the Taliban,
and he criticized the Afghan
government for its
cooperation with the U.S.
GULBUDDIN HEKMATYAR, Afghan
Warlord (through translator):
Let's all end this war together
in our country first, and tell
the foreign forces that Afghans
are able to sort out their
issues themselves, and that we
want them to leave Afghanistan.
No one has any justification for
the presence of foreign troops.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The
U.S. now has about 8,000
troops in Afghanistan.
Next week, the Pentagon is
widely expected to recommend
sending more troops.
Russia's Defense Ministry
announced today that four newly
declared safe zones in Syria
will be closed to U.S.
coalition aircraft.
It's part of a deal
that Russia, Turkey and
Iran signed yesterday.
It took effect tonight.
Syrian military planes
will also be banned from
the restricted areas.
The U.N. Human Rights Office
is condemning China for an
ongoing crackdown of activists
and their defense lawyers.
The agency said today
there's been a continued
pattern or harassment.
Within recent days, a prominent
defense lawyer and his
family were seized by police.
Back in this country, President
Trump signed the omnibus bill
to fund the government through
September.
It totals some $1.2 trillion.
Now the focus shifts to
the fate of the Republican
health care bill that
passed the House yesterday.
At the White House,
Deputy Spokeswoman Sarah
Huckabee Sanders said
the president understands
there are calls to
revise the measure.
®MD-BSARAH HUCKABEE
SANDERS, Deputy White
House Press Secretary:
He's committed to reforming
our health care system.
You're going to see
that process take place.
We're not going to get ahead
of the legislative process.
We expect there to be some
changes, but we expect the
principles and main pillars of
the health care bill as it
exists to remain the same.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Several key
Republican senators said today
they probably cannot support the
House bill.
President Trump has
lost his second nominee
for Army secretary.
Mark Green withdrew today,
saying -- quote - - "false and
misleading attacks" made his
nomination a distraction.
He drew fire for saying that
being transgender is a disease,
and deploring -- quote -- "the
indoctrination of Islam
in public schools."
The president's initial nominee,
Vincent Viola, withdrew because
of financial entanglements.
And Wall Street closed out
the week on the higher note.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained 55 points to close
near 21007, the Nasdaq rose
25 points, and the
S&P 500 added nine.
For the week, all three indexes
gained less than 1 percent.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
Puerto Rico in bankruptcy --
we talk to the territory's
governor; candidates make
their last appeals ahead
of a French election
with global consequences;
can South Sudan find a
way out of its brutal
civil war?; and much more.
Puerto Rico went over the
financial cliff this week.
The U.S. territory home to
more than three million people
essentially filed for bankruptcy
so it can restructure more
than $120 billion in debt
and pension obligations.
It would be the largest
municipal bankruptcy
in U.S. history.
It owes $72 billion to
creditors, many of whom
are angry they will
have to eat big losses
in bankruptcy court.
Thousands of protesters took
to the streets this week as
the pain spreads throughout the
island.
The government is reducing
public services, pensions are
likely to be cut, and, today,
it announced it will close
184 schools, forcing 27,000
students to find another school.
Its economy remains
mired in a slump, while
more than 45 percent of
the people there below
the poverty line.
Its governor, Ricardo Rossello,
joins me now from San Juan.
Governor, thank
for being with us.
What is the argument that you're
going to be making in court
on why you should be allowed
to restructure your
financial obligations?
GOV.
RICARDO ROSSELLO, Puerto Rico:
Well, what we asked, Hari,
was essentially to have the
courts' protection, so that we
wouldn't be attacked by some
-- what we feel are frivolous
lawsuits.
But we have ensued a
conversation with different
creditors, and our hope
is that we can find
a consensual renegotiation
route based on the fiscal plan
that we have implemented and
that's been certified
for Puerto Rico.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Well, how
much worse is it going to get?
This is just a day after the
announcement and you're already
talking about cutting back
on schools.
What other public services
are you going to have
to tighten your belt on?
GOV.
RICARDO ROSSELLO: Well, the
schools initiative was one that
was established for a couple
of months.
We have just announced today
which schools are the ones
that were going to be closed
now.
This initiative, of course,
has some fiscal relief, but the
objective is for our children
to actually consolidate
and that we can get
more human resource to
give a better service
to the kids, to the
children of Puerto Rico.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What about the
$49 billion in pension payments?
And that's the people
of Puerto Rico that have
been paying into this.
What are they likely to see?
GOV.
RICARDO ROSSELLO: Well, we're
working on a budget right
now, and part of the strategy
that we have ensued on the
fiscal plan is a pay-go system,
so that we're going to make
sure those pension
recipients get the funding.
Now, there's still a discussion
with the fiscal oversight plan
on how those cuts are going
to ensue.
Our proposal was that it's
supposed to be on a progressive
scale, so that those that
are most vulnerable, those
that receive less than $2,000
in pensions, will actually not
get a cut, and those that
receive higher will start
getting a progressive
cut on their pension.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Governor,
I know Puerto Rico is home to
you and it's home to the people
who live there.
But I have got to ask, how
can you keep your people
from leaving the island?
Right now, you have
unemployment at 12 percent.
You have lost 10 percent of your
population in the last 10 years.
You have lost 20 percent of the
jobs that are on the island.
If I was a resident of Puerto
Rico, why wouldn't I just pick
up and move to Florida or Texas
or anywhere on the mainland?
GOV.
RICARDO ROSSELLO: That's been
happening so far because we
haven't made the proper changes.
We haven't made the
changes to government.
Expenditures have gone
rampant in Puerto Rico, lack
of accountability, total
lack of accountability.
And what we're proposing
right now is a complete
change in that direction now.
I know there are going to be
some challenges during these
cuts and the right-sizing of
government.
The truth of the matter is that
we are being very aggressive, so
that we can lay the foundations
for investors to come to
Puerto Rico, for jobs to be
created, and for opportunities
to ensue.
And our objective, again, is
for Puerto Rico, for the people
of Puerto Rico who want to
stay here, for them to have
the opportunity to stay here.
Now, there's one last
thing we need to point out.
And it is a fact that Puerto
Rico is a colonial territory
of the United States.
This puts us in a very
significant disadvantage
to all of the other
states and to all of the
other American citizens.
As a matter of comparative,
the U.S. citizens, the Puerto
Ricans that live in the United
States have much better incomes,
more than twice as much,
participate in the labor force
of greater scales, have
better results in the
education system and so forth.
And the one key difference
is that Puerto Rico is
a colonial territory.
We don't have representation.
We have a difficult time
getting funding from
the federal government.
So, this is another
critical component
that we need to change.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So,
in the meantime, as your
population continues to
move to the mainland,
your tax base shrinks, which
only compounds this problem.
GOV.
RICARDO ROSSELLO: Right.
I agree.
But we're trying our best to
develop sort of strategies.
We have already turned into law
a labor reform law that will
allow for more opportunities
to ensue.
We have also established a
permits law that will facilitate
permits in Puerto Rico.
We are about to roll out a
comprehensive tax reform that
will enhance the base and will
reduce the rates in Puerto Rico.
And energy has been a big
challenge in Puerto Rico.
We are pushing very aggressively
with a comprehensive agenda, so
that we can collaborate with the
private sector and reduce
a lot of the costs.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Your debt
has been tax-free, which made
it very, very sought after for
municipal bond
funds, 401(k) funds.
What do you say to U.S.
taxpayers who have helped --
they kind of put their faith in
your future.
What happens if their retirement
funds suffer because of this?
GOV.
RICARDO ROSSELLO: Listen, I
just arrived to this position
a little over a hundred days
ago.
I am 38 years old, and I want to
live in Puerto Rico and I want
to create a path forward for
growth.
I realize that have come at the
most challenging times to become
governor, but I want to push
things forward.
I know that, with clear
leadership, with a clear path
forward, understanding that the
times are tough and that there
are great challenges, if we put
a step in the right direction, I
think we can push forward for
a better Puerto Rico and, of
course, renegotiation efforts
with different creditors,
so that it is something
that is reasonable
for them and something
that is reasonable for us.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What's been
your most recent conversation
with the Trump administration?
Just recently, the
president tweeted out.
It didn't seem very supportive
of a bailout for Puerto Rico.
I know you met with the
treasury secretary in February.
What's been the last
thing that you agree on?
GOV.
RICARDO ROSSELLO: So, we
met with the secretary of
health and human services.
We met with the administrator
of CMS, and we actually got
a letter supporting what our
claim was for Puerto Rico.
The secretary stated that Puerto
Rico needed $900 million to
have a path forward, to have
some runway.
It's not a bailout.
It's actually the moneys that
were assigned to Puerto Rico
and that we need to have a
system that actually works.
We're already cutting, mind
you, over $300 million in health
care expenditures over the
coming years.
So we're putting our part.
If the health care system over
here collapses because we have
a lack of funding, the cost
to the U.S. taxpayer
base is much higher.
For every dollar that is spent
here in Puerto Rico for a
patient, all of the states and
the federal government would
have to pay $4 for that.
So this is not a
bailout by any means.
It's reasonable ask.
It's what's fair for Puerto
Rico, and we're doing so in
a context where we're already
making changes, we're already
cutting costs, and we would
prevent much more costs on the
state level and on the
federal level if we do this.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Governor of Puerto Rico Ricardo
Rossello, thank you for joining
us.
GOV.
RICARDO ROSSELLO:
Thank you so much.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In the most
closely watched presidential
election in France in decades,
voters head to the
polls this Sunday.
It's the second round run-off
between centrist Emmanuel Macron
and far-right leader Marine
Le Pen.
Special correspondent
Malcolm Brabant is there.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The candidates
spent their final day of
campaigning in vastly different
places.
Centrist and heavy favorite
Emmanuel Macron strolled around
the small town of Rodez in
the southwest of France.
But he told a local radio
station he's not relaxing.
EMMANUEL MACRON, French
Presidential Candidate
(through translator):
I know the French men
and women, and you don't
dictate their choices.
So until the last minute, they
can decide, react, change.
So one must remain concentrated.
MALCOLM BRABANT: To the
north, far-right candidate
Marine Le Pen got a
hostile reception outside
the famed Reims Cathedral.
Later, she tweeted: "Monsieur
Macron's supporters act
with violence everywhere,
even in a symbolic
and sacred place.
No dignity."
And in an interview in Paris,
she took aim at her rival.
MARINE LE PEN, French
Presidential Candidate
(through translator): Mr.
Macron is the candidate
of the elites, he is the
candidate of the oligarchy,
he is the candidate of the big
private interests.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Macron
has been buoyed this
week by an endorsement
from former President
Obama and a solid performance
in Wednesday's bruising debate.
But Le Pen's anti-immigrant
National Front has kept
pressing its case in places like
the Yonne Valley.
Here, the Front is
preaching to the converted.
Former soldier Pascal
Roi supports Le Pen's
pledge to crack down
on Islamist militants.
PASCAL ROI, France
(through translator):
Regarding terrorism, she's
promised to expel people
flagged as threats to
national security and
dual nationals as well.
This is going to remove a burden
so we can keep a better eye
on the rest of the population.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Most of those
attending this final campaign
gathering were either seniors
or middle-aged.
There were no people of color.
The youngest voter was student
nurse Marie Buzetti, who
favors Le Pen's plan to follow
Britain out of the
European Union.
MARIE BUZETTI, France (through
translator): Today, we need
to regain our independence.
Today, we are the puppets
of the European Union
and it needs to change.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The National
Front has been accused of
preying on fears and whipping up
hatred.
Parliamentary candidate
Ludovic Vigreux didn't
hold back, warning that
Sharia law might one
day rule France forcing his
daughters to buy burkas.
"We need Marine," he said.
France needs Marine.
And Marine needs you."
As you can hear, they're
chanting "Marine for president."
And here in the countryside,
she may do very well.
But nationally it's not
looking good for her at all.
All the opinion polls suggest
that Emmanuel Macron is going
to win by a majority of 60
percent to 40 percent.
The Yonne Valley is
one of the poorest
districts of rural France.
The lack of job prospects
have forced many
residents to move away.
Le Pen's Frexit plans
worry marketing executive
David De Silva, and so
he will vote for the
pro-European candidate
Emmanuel Macron.
DAVID DE SILVA, France (through
translator): We have access to
everything, a great marketplace,
and it would be a
shame to lose that.
Today, we obviously can't
live without Europe.
MALCOLM BRABANT: One of the
most important factors in this
election is the large number
of undecided voters.
If millions abstain, it
could benefit Marine Le Pen.
Restaurant worker Joanna
Thurloy voted for left-winger
Jean-Luc Melenchon in the first
round and now faces
a major dilemma.
JOANNA THURLOY, France
(through translator):
I don't feel understood
by either side, because,
with Emmanuel Macron,
it's all about capitalism
and speculation.
And Marine Le Pen, it's
her family history of
being on the extreme right.
We have already
been through this.
MALCOLM BRABANT: There's
an undertone of defiance
and maybe even desperation
amongst the Front
supporters as they
chant, "We will win."
In order for Le Pen to enter
the presidential palace, there
will have to be a political
surprise of Brexit or
Donald Trump proportions.
And that's the mantra to
which parliamentary candidate
Julien Odoul is clinging.
JULIEN ODOUL, Parliamentary
Candidate (through translator):
Because she's the only one who
speaks to the French, the only
one who speaks to the forgotten
ones, all those French who've
been abandoned for decades.
MALCOLM BRABANT: France's
national anthem, written in
the 18th century, is all about
conflict.
If Marine Le Pen upsets the
odds and wins on Sunday, France
and the European Union will
face a major upheaval.
But the pollsters believe French
voters want stability and will
follow the Dutch in rejecting
right-wing nationalism.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Malcolm Brabant
in the Yonne Valley.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Late today,
Emmanuel Macron's campaign said
they have been hacked and the
internal documents have been
posted online just hours before
voters head to the polls.
It issued a statement saying it
won't tolerate the undermining
of democracy's vital interests.
Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
empowering diabetes patients to
control their own health; Mark
Shields and Michael Gerson
weigh in on the GOP health care
plan; and a college president's
plea for protecting free speech.
But first: All this week,
we have brought you reports
from South Sudan on the roots
of its conflict, the famine
there, and the use of
rape as a weapon of war.
And from neighboring Uganda,
we met South Sudanese refugees
fleeing for a better life.
Tonight, we ask, what will
it take to end the violence?
And we turn to Nii Akuetteh.
He has led a number of nonprofit
organizations that promoted
democracy and good governance
in Africa.
He is now an
independent analyst.
And Brian Adeba, he is
the associate director
for policy at The Enough
Project, which advocates
for accountability for genocide
and atrocities in Africa.
So, Nii Akuetteh, the
world's youngest country,
how did we get here so fast?
NII AKUETTEH, Independent
Analyst: I think it's because,
in their fight for independence,
the rest of the world focused
on who they were fighting,
Khartoum, and I think we didn't
pay enough attention to the
rivalries and the dissensions
and the fault lines within
the South Sudanese leadership.
And also, while they
took control of the new
country with the rules to
be written and resources
and rivalries, I also do think
that the death of John Garang,
who everything says was an
outstanding leader, his
death in a helicopter
crash also led to that.
Finally, I think the world
needs to pay more attention
to what's going on.
HARI SREENIVASAN:
Anything to add?
BRIAN ADEBA, The Enough
Project: Well, indeed
what he said is true.
At independence, a small
group of people in the ruling
party, a small group of elites
hijacked government and all its
institutions, and ensued on a
corruption spree that created
a lot of dissension
within the party.
Ultimately, in the end,
rivalries started appearing
in the party because
of this corruption.
The state became the most
prized asset that everyone
was vying for control of.
Unfortunately, for the ruling
party itself, because it had
incapacitated the ability of
institutions to mitigate this
conflict, in the end, the
conflict began to be expressed
in violent terms.
And that's where
we are right now.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So,
stopping the conflict is the
first priority for everyone.
Why hasn't worked?
Why hasn't it worked so
far, whatever we have tried?
NII AKUETTEH: I think one
of the methods, one of the
measures that people have talked
about that have not actually
implemented is stopping the
flow of arms into the country.
It's like pouring
gasoline on fire.
And various international
players behind the
scenes are reluctant,
both in the region and
then globally.
I think that's
one of the things.
But the other thing is
that not enough pressure.
I mean, the people who are doing
-- the leadership doing the
fighting, they have not suffered
from it.
And I think one other aspect of
the fighting that needs to be
stressed is, heartbreakingly,
it has become ethnicized,
so that ordinary people
are being killed.
There are ethnic militias.
So I think stopping it
will be -- is going to
be quite a challenge.
BRIAN ADEBA: It's true.
The missing element here is
leverage, what can be done to
exert leverage, so that the
parties in the conflict
change their calculations
towards peace.
That's been missing.
And we have suggested that
targeted pressures, targeted
sanctions are essential, an arms
embargo.
Targeted sanctions are
essential because most of
these transactions happen
in the U.S. dollars.
And that gives the U.S.
jurisdiction to act
within the toolkit here,
the precious toolkit
available to
policy-makers in the U.S.
There are measures that can
be enacted to trace these
assets, to seize these assets
in some aspects, and to send
a message to the perpetrators
of this conflict that there
is a price to pay for war.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Is that the
most effective way to do it,
because the U.S. dollar is the
sort of currency of the day?
NII AKUETTEH: Oh, I agree
totally, because also ,on the
global stage, the U.S. looms
large.
And the U.S. was a
leader in supporting the
independence of South Sudan.
But even if you take a more
narrow view of U.S.' own
national interests, it's always
been said that ungoverned
spaces breed terrorism,
which eventually can
come to affect the U.S.
So, frankly, when I
look down the road, this
is an American issue.
Now, the fighters are
South Sudanese, the
victims are South Sudanese.
But it should concern Americans.
And I think, for one, think
that Congress needs to make
its voice strong and push the
State Department to work
with various organizations,
because, otherwise,
it will get worse, and
that -- we will then see that
it's beginning to affect the
American interests in ways that
cannot be missed.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Brian, as
he points out, the U.S. was
instrumental in trying to birth
this nation.
But is this administration
going to -- are there
any indications that
they're going to
pay as close attention to this?
BRIAN ADEBA: Well,
I'm quite optimistic.
If we look back at the
statements -- the statement
that the U.S. ambassador
to the United Nations,
Nikki Haley, uttered a few
weeks ago, it was the very first
time that a member of the Trump
administration had come out
very strongly on South Sudan.
She chided how her
counterparts in the Security
Council for inaction on
South Sudan and suggested
that perhaps it's time
now to broach or examine
the possibility of an
arms embargo to stop
the carnage that is going on.
She also called out
the president of South
Sudan for continuing to
perpetuate the conflict
and also the other
political elements
involved in this conflict.
So, that's encouraging.
From a multilateral perspective,
an arms embargo is very, very
essential, and the U.S. has
a lot of room and
opportunity to use that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Is that the
best way for us to move forward?
Is it through a body
like the United Nations?
Is there something the
United States should
be doing independent?
NII AKUETTEH: I think so.
The region original organization
IGAD, Sudan, Uganda, Kenya,
Ethiopia, all of them have
played a great role.
And, in fact, up until
some time ago, they
played a positive role.
But now, in fact, the reason
that there has been no push on
the leadership in South Sudan
is because IGAD
itself is divided.
And within IGAD, what I'm
saying is, the U.S., apart from
pressure like Brian has said, on
the Sudanese leaders, South
Sudanese leaders, to also put
pressure on the countries in the
region.
I mean, U.S. relations with
Khartoum is warming up.
It has good relations
with Uganda.
with Ethiopia.
It has good
relations with Kenya.
So, I, for one, think the U.S.
should also put pressure on
these countries to come to
a meeting of the
minds, because they are
backing different sides.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All
right, Nii Akuetteh, Brian
Adeba, thank you both.
NII AKUETTEH: Thank
you for having us.
HARI SREENIVASAN: More than
eight million Americans suffer
from diabetes, and more than
$320 billion are spent every
year treating the disease.
But an innovative program
in San Diego is trying to
improve health and reduce those
costs by encouraging better
self-management of the disease.
Special correspondent
Cat Wise has our report.
CAT WISE: Fifty-one year old
Alma Ayala is not a doctor
or a nurse, but she is on the
front lines of the diabetes
epidemic in her community.
She's a peer educator for a
program called Project Dulce,
which works with people who
have diabetes or are at risk of
developing the chronic illness.
Her classes are
part informational,
part support group.
Ayala says the goal of the
program, which has been held
up as a national model, is for
people to feel empowered
about changing their health.
That's something she didn't
feel 30 years ago when she
was first diagnosed with the
disease.
ALMA AYALA, Project
Dulce: I was devastated.
I didn't want to hear
the word diabetes.
I felt that my life was
done, that I was signing
a certificate of death.
CAT WISE: Here in San Diego
County, nearly half the adult
population has pre-diabetes
and about 8 percent
have diabetes.
It's a disease that affects
all socioeconomic groups and
races, but the Latino community
has been disproportionately
impacted.
And that's the population
Project Dulce has been targeting
for the past 20 years.
ALMA AYALA: There are lots
of barriers for the Latino
community, language, insurance.
Sometimes, doctors don't have
the time to spend with them.
So the classes that we provide
is that extra support, working
together with a clinical
team to help our
participants stay healthy.
CAT WISE: The program
is scattered throughout
12 clinics in Latino
neighborhoods throughout
San Diego County and was
designed by several local health
care organizations, including
the Scripps Whittier
Diabetes Institute.
Dr. Athena Philis-Tsimikas
is an endocrinologist
who oversees the program.
DR.
ATHENA PHILIS-TSIMIKAS, Scripps
Whittier Diabetes Institute:
This is a disease in which you
have to do a number of
management components,
not only every day,
but many times a day.
And it's not that easy to expect
someone to remember to test
their blood sugar, take their
pill, to go out and take that
walk, to have exactly the
right meal on the table all the
time to take care of this.
I don't see any lows there, so
I don't think we have to worry
that you might dip down too
low.
CAT WISE: To help patients,
a team is set up at each
clinic with a physician, nurse
practitioner, a dietitian
and multiple peer
counselors like Ayala who
come from the communities
they serve and also
have the disease.
DR.
ATHENA PHILIS-TSIMIKAS: If you
can train these other people
and professionals to help you
do the other components
that take longer, but
are still absolutely
necessary, then you're
using your team to work very
synergistically to deliver
everything that patient needs in
order to improve their care.
CAT WISE: The program
is now adding another
layer, technology.
Last year, Tsimikas conducted
a study to see if patients
receiving daily text messages
could manage their
disease even better.
Artist Gloria Favela-Rocha
was one of the participants.
She's a muralist who does large
scale works for hospitals,
schools and private clients.
She says, before the study,
she often forgot to regularly
check her glucose levels.
Project Dulce changed that.
GLORIA FAVELA-ROCHA, Diabetes
Patient: The text message would
come every day at the same
time, so if I would lose track
of where I was during my day,
I would hear it ring, and
so I would start checking
my blood sugars, send
in my result right away.
It would send me back a
message according to whatever
my result was, like good job,
or maybe you need to
eat something that has a
little more protein today.
So, it was just very --
it was very convenient.
CAT WISE: Dr. Tsimikas' team
has also been studying the
effects of continuous glucose
monitoring, which uses Bluetooth
technology to send results
to the patient and physician
in real time.
MAGDALENA HERNANDEZ, Diabetes
Patient: This device is
reading my sugar levels.
CAT WISE: Magdalena
Hernandez wears a small
monitor on her stomach.
MAGDALENA HERNANDEZ: I love it.
I love it because I don't have
to prick my finger many times
during the day, and it alerts
me when my blood sugar
goes high or goes low.
CAT WISE: And what happens
if your levels go above 200?
What do you do?
MAGDALENA HERNANDEZ: I grab
a bottle of water, and I get
up and walk for five minutes.
CAT WISE: Thirty miles away,
Dr. Tsimikas is also able to
keep tabs on Hernandez's levels.
DR.
ATHENA PHILIS-TSIMIKAS: This
is just over the last three
hours, that she probably ate
breakfast here, it went
up, and is now declining.
CAT WISE: This technology
has been on the market for
several years, but has not been
widely used because
of cost and a somewhat
complicated user interface.
But Tsimikas says those barriers
are being reduced and she
predicts it will have a big
impact on health.
DR.
ATHENA PHILIS-TSIMIKAS:
It is reinforcement to
both the patient and
to the provider that's
helping to make
recommendations on whether
this is working or not.
I think it's really going
to revolutionize the way we
can take care of patients.
CAT WISE: Dr. Tsimikas says
the objective is to prevent
the serious complications that
can accompany diabetes,
including blindness,
kidney failure, amputations
or heart failure.
MAGDALENA HERNANDEZ: I really
love the black beans and
all the vegetables in here.
CAT WISE: According to studies
conducted by the University
of California, San Diego, and
elsewhere, Project Dulce has
helped lower patients' blood
sugar and cholesterol levels,
while at the same time
reduced the number of
costly hospitalizations
and emergency room
visits.
While some elements of
the program are being
used in other communities,
Project Dulce stands
out for its
comprehensive approach.
So, why aren't similar
initiatives being rolled out in
every neighborhood in America?
DR.
ATHENA PHILIS-TSIMIKAS: It's
probably the way we reimburse
for each of these components.
That's probably
the biggest hurdle.
We traditionally have reimbursed
only for physician visits.
If we could find a way to
actually reimburse for each of
these components, it may be more
sustainable for the future.
Or maybe we simply reimburse
based on our success.
If you are successful in
achieving better outcomes,
maybe then you pay for what led
to those better outcomes.
CAT WISE: In the coming weeks,
Project Dulce will begin a new
study of patients that combines
text messaging with
continuous glucose
monitoring and a wireless
pill box that will alert a
nurse if a patient isn't
taking his or her medication.
From San Diego, I'm Cat
Wise for the "PBS NewsHour."
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now to the
analysis of Shields and Gerson.
That's syndicated columnist
Mark Shields and Washington
Post columnist Michael Gerson.
David Brooks is away.
Let's start with this
little party that was on
the Rose Garden yesterday.
The beer cases were brought in.
There was a
celebratory atmosphere.
President Trump rightfully
brought the House Republicans
there after they pushed their
health care repeal and replace
bill through the House.
How did they manage to do this?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, first of
all, the event itself, the only
thing more -- or as unseemly
as the self-congratulatory
bus trip to the White House --
it was like after you had won
an office softball game and
you break out the beer -- were
the Democrats on the House
floor taunting bye,
bye, bye to Republicans.
This is trivializing
a moral issue.
And this -- to me, that's what
health care is, whether in
fact it is a right of a citizen
in this country to health care.
And I think it's a serious
question, whether we share our
benefits and share our burdens,
or whether in fact
we're all in this alone.
And what the House passed
yesterday was something
that just had to be done.
I mean, otherwise, you're
staring into the abyss of
total political failure.
Republicans had gone through
four elections where the one
unanimous position they had
all taken as a party
was the repeal of Barack
Obama's Affordable Care Act.
Sixty-two times, they
courageously and boldly
voted to do, knowing it
didn't count, knowing
it wasn't going to go anywhere.
The 63rd time was
tougher, because what
they passed yesterday
has serious implications
for them politically
and certainly for the
people of the country.
MICHAEL GERSON: It's
a great moral issue.
But this passed because
Paul Ryan got granular.
He identified who he needed
and what they wanted and
essentially gave it to them.
So, moderates get
the high-risk fund.
The Freedom Caucus
gets the waivers.
He just put on the table
what he needed to get
across the finish line.
Now, that doesn't make it a good
bill or even a coherent bill.
But I think the trust here is
that Ryan will hand this off
to McConnell, McConnell has
some rational process that the
House can no longer produce,
because of its own internal
dynamics, and that they
might get an improved
product at the end.
The other thing that's
worth noting that is
really fascinating is
the almost absence of
presidential leadership
in producing this victory.
He was really not very
engaged or involved.
Paul Ryan is learning to live
without the normal role of the
president in the legislative
process.
But it is unique, his absence.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So,
what happens by the time
it gets to the Senate?
Nancy Pelosi has already
said, listen, this is the vote
that's going to be tattooed on
you come reelection time.
But more important, the Senate's
going to change it in some
way shape or form, if they
move forward at all.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes, they are.
Just one quick point
to Michael's point.
And that is the $8 billion
fig leaf -- and it was a fig
leaf -- that they're going to
cover people with a preexisting
condition, which was the
price to get Billy Long and
Fred Upton, represents less
than one-fifth of 1 percent
of the cost of Medicaid.
It's not going to last
beyond a couple of months.
It was just something that they
could go back and sell to their
own constituencies and for
their own purposes.
It's meaningless.
But what's going to
happen in the Senate?
I will say this.
We have just seen the high
watermark for this legislation.
Every Republican in the
House who voted for it
will have to answer for it.
And this is a stand-alone
piece of it, whatever
happens in the Senate.
And nobody really knows.
There are 11 Republican
governors, don't forget
- - and this is where
this starts to count
- - who expanded, accepted the
Medicaid expansion, and who have
covered people in their state,
and from John Kasich, to
Rick Snyder in Michigan,
to Gary Herbert in
Utah, to Brian Sandoval
in Nevada, across the country.
And so it's a different
dynamic in the Senate.
They have got states represented
by senators like Rob Portman,
a traditional conservative,
who is going to fight
for the preservation
of Medicaid expansion.
MICHAEL GERSON: The Senate is
acting pretty much from scratch.
They're not going to the
House bill and building on it.
They're taking away.
Lamar Alexander has been charged
to produce their own approach.
There's a small group
of senators that is
kind of diverse, at
least within the caucus,
that is working on this.
And Senator McConnell has
promised them some time for
deliberation, unlike the way the
House passed this.
So, the probably -- is exactly
what you're talking about.
Senator Collins has already
announced she will not support
a bill that doesn't include
Planned Parenthood funding, OK?
The bill will not include
Planned Parenthood funding.
That means that
Republicans need 51 votes.
They have got a margin
of one in producing this
piece of legislation.
There's no margin of
error for them here.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All
right, let's talk about
another Rose Garden event
that happened yesterday,
really kind of talking
about religion in
politics, and the Trump
administration bringing that
to the fore.
He signed an executive order
easing an IRS rule limiting
political activity by houses
of worship.
This was also on day that
President Trump proclaimed a
national day of prayer and had
a statement saying -- quote
-- "All human beings have the
right to practice their faith
in private and in
the public square."
The public square portion,
does that raise any concerns?
MARK SHIELDS: It doesn't to me,
and it apparently didn't to the
American Civil Liberties Union
either.
I happen to believe that
this was a strict political
payoff, in symbolic terms, that
evangelical white Christians
had been his most supporters;
81 percent of them voted
for him.
And I, for one, will break
with liberal ranks and make the
case that America's original
sin existed until organized
religion, namely, the
American Methodists, the
Anglican evangelicals,
and Quakers led the
fight to abolish slavery.
There wouldn't have been a civil
rights bill, legislation in
this country without the active
involvement of Jewish, Catholic
and Protestant, particularly
black Protestant leadership,
so -- as well as peace movement.
So, I'm not as concerned
about the involvement
in the public square.
Donald Trump's religiosity
has always been
rather elusive to me.
(CROSSTALK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Sorry.
Is this a backdoor option or
a possibility where this could
be sort of Citizens United
2.0?
Let's just today build
the church of Mark
and Michael, totally
tax-exempt organizations,
raise as much money as you
want, donate to whatever
political party you would like?
MICHAEL GERSON: Well,
I don't know if it
even accomplishes that.
I mean, the Johnson amendment,
you know, I have never seen
anywhere, encountered someone
complaining about
rigorous enforcement of
the Johnson amendment.
I have been around
this a long time.
It's a nonexistent issue.
It's a solution in
search of a problem.
And it is a sop.
It is an empty symbol.
The problem here that we're
seeing more recently is not that
religion is hurting the public
square too much.
It's that politics is
undermining and invading the
credibility of religion itself.
People who support Donald
Trump, many of them were
people who said that
Bill Clinton's character
mattered more than
anything else.
And now they're embracing Trump.
And people are looking at this
and saying that this is a joke.
This is hypocrisy.
And so I think the risk here
is actually to religion.
HARI SREENIVASAN: To
that point, I mean...
MARK SHIELDS: It's a good point.
On your point, yes, I am deeply
concerned, and have been,
and especially now that we
have got a smokescreen
of charitable religious
institutions being formed
basically for political
ends, and for partisan
political purpose.
And what it amounts to in public
policy terms is, I'm making
a donation, a tax-deducted
donation, for a political
purpose to support my political
cause or your political cause,
which I think is absolutely
wrong, and it's a corruption.
MICHAEL GERSON: I just haven't
seen much evidence of it.
HARI SREENIVASAN:
I don't know...
MARK SHIELDS: We have certainly
seen -- we have seen phony,
bogus charitable foundations
created for that purpose.
HARI SREENIVASAN: I
don't socially if this
happens already, but
do you end up picking
your church a little bit
more because you know how
that church is going to vote?
I'm going to reveal my Hindu
roots here, but I thought
Jesus was an independent, not a
Democrat or a Republican.
MICHAEL GERSON: Well,
I think that's true.
Whenever a pastor makes a
political statement, they're at
risk of alienating a portion of
their congregation on
issues that have nothing
to do with religion, or
at least their judgment
is not particularly
sanctified on these issues.
I mean, I would rather go to the
average bartender for political
advice than the average priest
or minister.
(LAUGHTER)
MICHAEL GERSON: So, you know,
I think that they don't have
an expertise in many of these
issues.
And that's up to laymen
in the church and that,
from the pulpit, there
needs to be fairness.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Yes,
all right, Michael
Gerson, Mark Shields.
MARK SHIELDS: It's a
good point you make.
HARI SREENIVASAN:
All right, thank you.
(CROSSTALK)
HARI SREENIVASAN:
Thank you very much.
MARK SHIELDS: Thank you, Hari.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right.
Tomorrow night here in
Washington, the prestigious
PEN/Faulkner Award for
Fiction will be given.
Jeffrey Brown talks with the
winning author, the latest in
our "NewsHour" Bookshelf series.
JEFFREY BROWN: An immigrant
couple from West Africa working
for a wealthy New York family
as the great recession
is about to hit in 2008.
The novel "Behold the Dreamers"
is a story of the contemporary
American dream through
the lens of class,
race and immigration.
Author Imbolo Mbue came to
the U.S. from Cameroon in 1998
and became a citizen in 2014.
This is first nurse novel.
And because of that, even
more congratulations to you.
IMBOLO MBUE, Author, "Behold the
Dreamers": Thank you, Jeffrey.
JEFFREY BROWN: You're working
here in a great American fiction
tradition about immigration.
What did you want to
bring to that story?
What did you want to tell?
IMBOLO MBUE: Well, when I start
writing this novel, it wasn't
very much about immigration.
It was about the
financial crisis.
I was very interested in how
the financial crisis affected
the lives of New Yorkers from
different economic statutes.
So I wanted to write
about an immigrant from
my country who gets a job
as a chauffeur (INAUDIBLE)
executive, but, of course, an
immigrant coming here for the
American dream and facing the
financial crisis, I wanted to
write about how that affected
him and how -- and also
explore like the dreams
and hopes he has himself
when he came to America.
So, I ended up writing about
the immigrant experience, coming
here, realizing what America
really is like, and also
deciding whether it is
really worth staying here.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, these
characters, the main characters,
Jende and Neni, from Cameroon,
they're experiencing both
sides of the American dream.
They tell us that they see
it as both wonderful and
awful at the same time.
IMBOLO MBUE: Yes.
It's very complex, this idea
of the American dream, because,
on one hand, when we're back
in our countries, we especially,
when I was growing up in
Cameroon, we had this image
of American being the sort of
promised land, and this country
where you go to and you work
hard and you get to achieve
this life, a lot of material
success, a house and nice cars
and (INAUDIBLE) accounts.
And that is what they
came for, Jende and Neni.
And then they got here, and they
see the realities of social --
a lot of social issues, economic
inequity, and racism and
sexism, and all of those issues.
And they have to deal with it.
And they also have -- see
what it's like for people
who achieve the dream.
JEFFREY BROWN: But by
doing that and by setting
it in that period, you're
also raising question
of class, right?
IMBOLO MBUE: Right.
JEFFREY BROWN: But, as a writer,
you have to see this couple
-- you have to see everybody
with some sympathy.
IMBOLO MBUE: Right,
right, right.
JEFFREY BROWN: Right?
So, the Edwards family,
which is wealthy...
IMBOLO MBUE: Right.
JEFFREY BROWN: ...
and the immigrant
family, they get along.
They don't get along.
There are all kinds of clashes.
But for you, what?
What are they?
IMBOLO MBUE: Well, for me, it
was, I had a lot of empathy
for the immigrants, because
I am an immigrant.
I am from the same town where
Jende and Neni come from.
So I know those struggles.
The struggles of the Edwards,
the 1 percent, people who
have that amount of privilege,
is not something that I have
dealt with during my life.
So I had to push myself to
think about, what are their
struggles, and what does it take
to hold this dream
life together?
Because they do
have the dream life.
They have a house
in the Hamptons.
They live on the
Upper East Side.
They have so many privileges.
And yet they have
their own struggles.
So, on one hand, I had one
family that was living the dream
and that family growing after
the dream.
And when the recession
happened, both families had to
deal with the consequences.
JEFFREY BROWN: You referred
to your own background.
How much is this your story?
IMBOLO MBUE: In many ways,
you know, I was like Jende and
Neni, in the fact that, when
I came here, I thought
America would be a
sort of promised land.
And I do believe that it
is a wonderful country.
I think it's a country that
offers a lot of immigrants.
But, at the same time, this
American dream, what I have seen
is that it's not accessible,
and that somebody like Jende,
a black man without a good
education, and he's also dealing
with not having papers, that
somebody like that, the odds
of moving out of poverty is
very difficult.
JEFFREY BROWN: You're also
dealing in this very difficult
and divisive issue over illegal
immigration, because
they overstay what
they're allowed to.
IMBOLO MBUE: Right,
right, the visa.
JEFFREY BROWN: They want
to stay in the country.
They're facing deportation.
So, you know there's a great
debate in the country over this.
IMBOLO MBUE: Right.
JEFFREY BROWN: I mean,
you portray them as
sympathetic characters
who want to work hard.
IMBOLO MBUE: Right.
Right.
JEFFREY BROWN: But you know
that there are plenty of
people who would say, well, I'm
sorry, you're not
playing by the rules.
IMBOLO MBUE: Right.
Right.
And it is a very,
very complex issue.
I think that, for me, as a
writer, that my job is to tell
the story and let the reader
decide: Should I empathize with
people like Jende who don't
have papers, or I should vilify
them?
I don't -- this is not
a moralizing story.
I think people can read my book
and use it as pro-immigration
or use it as anti-immigration
argument.
My place is to tell the story
honestly and completely.
But I think that it is
important to understand
each other's stories.
It's so easy to put people
in a box and say, oh, people
without any papers, but who are
these people, what
are their stories?
And I also am a citizen, right?
So, I also understand
the citizen perspective.
I am an immigrant and
I'm a citizen, and I
know what it's like to
be both and to understand
that desire to come here and
work hard, but also that desire
to, like, think about America's
future.
JEFFREY BROWN: Let me ask
you finally, as I said,
this is your first novel.
And you won a big award.
That's got to be a bit of a
surprise, a welcome surprise,
right, for a young writer.
IMBOLO MBUE: Yes.
Yes, it is a good privilege.
I started writing this
book when I was unemployed.
I had lost my job at the
end of the financial crisis.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, this hit
-- that hit you personally?
IMBOLO MBUE: Yes.
Yes.
And I thought that writing
a story about people
from my hometown and
other New Yorkers who
I have met in some ways and
talk about their own struggles.
And then I got a novel,
and it got published.
And to win an award
like the PEN/Faulkner,
it is a great honor.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right.
Well, the award-winning book
is "Behold the Dreamers."
Imbolo Mbue, thank
you very much.
IMBOLO MBUE: Thank you, Jeffrey.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Finally: We
are headed into commencement
season, and each week seems to
bring a new fight over
whose ideas should be heard.
Tonight, Trinity College
President Joanne Berger-Sweeney
shares her Humble Opinion that
universities are exactly
the place for these
difficult conversations.
Have a listen.
JOANNE BERGER-SWEENEY,
President, Trinity
College: These days, you
can't miss the criticism
aimed at higher education.
We hear it: We're a bunch
of intolerant elites.
Our students are
precious snowflakes.
As educators, we're
stifling speech and thought,
and we're not preparing
students for the real
world.
Frankly, I get it.
Lately, some campus protests
around the country have gone
awry in truly ugly ways.
Now it's commencement season.
Are controversial speakers
going to be uninvited and
ceremonies halted by protests?
If so, all of us in higher
education should be ashamed.
It's our job as educators to
uphold free speech and to teach
the responsibilities that come
with that freedom.
And, yes, we must provide
safe spaces, spaces that are
safe for speech, not from it.
But it seems more than ever
that we're just refusing
to hear one another.
Maybe that's because listening
to the other side can hurt.
Let me tell you, as an
African-American woman,
I have heard it all, and
a lot of it has hurt.
I didn't have to agree with it,
like when I was told a black
girl couldn't be a scientist,
but I didn't have the
option of not hearing it.
And now I'm the first woman, the
first person of color, the first
neuroscientist to be president
of Trinity College.
But guess what?
I'm not representing just
African-Americans, or
women, or neuroscientists.
I'm representing Trinity
College, a community with a
variety of points of view.
I have to be true to myself,
but I can't be a responsible
leader without teaching students
this important lesson:
Silencing voices and refusing
to listen harms us all.
That's why, for my first
commencement as president
in 2015, I awarded
honorary degrees to both
a retired Air Force general
and a renowned peace advocate.
And that's why, this year,
we will hear a commencement
speech from philosopher Daniel
Dennett, a well-known
atheist, beside the
statue of our founding
president, an Episcopalian
bishop, exposing students to
different perspectives and
helping them bridge divides.
This work is deeply
personal to me.
It may be the most important
work I will do as president.
When we teach students how to
analyze an opposing argument and
sharpen their own, how to relate
across differences, how
to listen and be heard,
we are preparing our
students for the real
world.
In fact, we're giving
them the tools to make
our world a lot better.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And before
we go, as we reported earlier,
French presidential candidate
Emmanuel Macron's campaign
said it was the victim
of a massive hack.
It said hundreds of authentic
and fake internal documents have
been leaked hours before the
vote.
Also, The Dallas Morning News
reports a police officer in
suburban Dallas has been charged
with murder over the weekend
killing of a teenager.
The officer fired a rifle
into a car as it left a party.
On the "NewsHour" online
right now: Read how a
recent reporting trip
to coal country in
West Virginia inspired a
journalist's 7-year-old
son to turn water pollution
in his own neighborhood
into a science fair experiment.
All that and more is on our
Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And Robert Costa is
gearing up for "Washington
Week" this evening.
Robert, what do you got?
ROBERT COSTA: Tonight, we look
at the policy and politics
behind the House bill to replace
Obamacare.
If it becomes law, how much of
it will change who gets coverage
and how much will it cost?
We will have some answers
and analysis later tonight
on "Washington Week" -- Hari.
HARI SREENIVASAN:
Thank you, Robert.
On "PBS NewsHour Weekend"
Saturday: how the youth
vote could determine
France's next president
and what the two candidates are
doing to win over the young.
Join me tomorrow.
And Judy Woodruff will
be back here on Monday.
That's the "NewsHour"
for tonight.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Have a great weekend.
Thank you, and see you soon.